Introduction to updating firmware

Preface

ROC-RK3399-PC Pro has 2 working modes. Under normal circumstances,
boot directly into "Normal mode" to start the system normally. If you
need to upgrade the board subsystem, you can choose the appropriate
"Upgrade mode" to upgrade the firmware according to the situation.
Note: ROC-RK3399-PC Pro installs the Android operating system by
default.


ROC-RK3399-PC Pro is classified according to the working mode and can
be divided into two working modes:

Normal mode

Upgrade mode

Among the upgrade modes, the comparison between different upgrade
modes:

MaskRom Upgrade Mode

In general, there is no need to enter "MaskRom Upgrade Mode". Only
when the bootloader verification fails (the IDB block cannot be read,
or the bootloader is damaged), the BootRom code will enter this mode.
At this time, the BootRom code waits for the host to transmit the
bootloader code through the USB interface, load and run it. When the
board becomes bricked and cannot start or upgrade the program
normally, you can also manually enter the "MaskRom Upgrade Mode".

To forcibly enter MaskRom Upgrade Mode, please refer to the chapter
"MaskRom Upgrade Mode".

Loader upgrade mode

In "Loader upgrade mode", the bootloader will enter an upgrade state,
waiting for host commands for firmware upgrades, etc. To enter this
mode, the bootloader must detect a "RECOVERY" key press at startup and
the USB is connected.

To force into Loader upgrade mode, see the chapter "Loader upgrade
mode".

SD upgrade mode

Using SD upgrade is essentially to make a bootable SD-boot upgrade
firmware, let the board SD boot, erase and program the EMMC.

To forcibly enter SD upgrade mode, please refer to the chapter
"Upgrade Firmware Using SD Card".
