Upgrade the firmware

Introduction

This article describes how to upgrade the firmware file on the host to
the flash memory of the development board through the Type-C data
cable. When upgrading, you need to choose the appropriate upgrade mode
according to the host operating system and firmware type.

Preparatory work

ROC-RK3399-PC Pro development board

Firmware

Host computer

Type-C data cable

There are two types of firmware files:

A single unified firmware  The unified firmware is a single file
packaged and merged by all files such as the partition table,
bootloader, uboot, kernel, system and so on. The firmware officially
released by Firefly adopts a unified firmware format. Upgrading the
unified firmware will update the data and partition table of all
partitions on the motherboard, and erase all data on the motherboard.

Multiple partition images  That is, files with independent functions,
such as partition table, bootloader, and kernel, are generated during
the development phase. The independent partition image can only update
the specified partition, while keeping other partition data from being
destroyed, it will be very convenient to debug during the development
process.

   Through the unified firmware unpacking / packing tool, the unified
   firmware can be unpacked into multiple partition images, or
   multiple partition images can be merged into a unified firmware.

Flash on windows

Tool: Androidtool_xxx (version number)

<font color=#ff0000 >Note :</font>

 Different firmware may use different versions of tools, please
download the corresponding version according to the

Instructions for writing with USB cable (important)

.

Install RK USB drive

Download

Release_DriverAssistant.zip

, extract, and then run the DriverInstall.exe inside . In order for
all devices to use the updated driver, first select "Driver uninstall"
and then select "Driver install".


Connected devices

You can put the device into upgrade mode as follows:

Disconnect the power adapter first:  Dual male usb data cable connects
one end to the host and the other end to the development board.  Press
the RECOVERY button on the device and hold.  Connect to the power
supply.  About two seconds later, release the RECOVERY button.

The host should prompt for new hardware and configure the driver. Open
Device manager and you will see the new Device "Rockusb Device" appear
as shown below. If not, you need to go back to the previous step and
reinstall the driver.


Upgrade the firmware

Download

Androidtool_xxx (version number)

. AndroidTool defaults to display in Chinese. We need to change it to
English. Open "config.ini" with an text editor (like notepad). The
starting lines are:

   #选择工具语言:Selected=1(Chinese);Selected=2(English)
   [Language]
   Kinds=2
   Selected=1
   LangPath=Language\

Change "Selected=1" to "Selected=2", and save. From now on,
AndroidTool will display in English.Now, run AndroidTool.exe: (Note:
If using Windows 7/8, you’ll need to right click it, select to run it
as Administrator)


Upgrade unified firmware - update.img

The steps to update the unified firmware "update.img" are as follows:

Switch to the "upgrade firmware" page.

Press the "firmware" button to open the firmware file to be upgraded.
The upgrade tool displays detailed firmware information.

Press the "upgrade" button to start the upgrade.

<font color=#ff0000 >If the upgrade fails, you can try to erase the
Flash by pressing the erase Flash button first, and then upgrade. Be
sure to erase and upgrade according to Upgrade instructions.</font>

Note: if the firmware loader you wrote is inconsistent with the
original one, please execute wipe Flash before upgrading the firmware.


Upgrade Partition image

Each firmware partition may be different, please note the following
two points:

When upgrading ubuntu(MBR) and Android7.1 firmware with
Androidtool_2.38, the default configuration can be used.

When upgrading ubuntu(GPT) with Androidtool_2.58, the default
configuration can be used. Please first perform the following actions
to upgrade Android8.1 firmware:<br /> <font color=#ff0000 >Switch to
"download image page "; Right click on the table and select "import
configuration "; Select the "rk3399-Android81.cfg".</font><br />

When upgrading Android9.0 and Android10.0 firmware with
Androidtool_2.49, the default configuration can be used.

The steps to upgrade the partition image are as follows: 1. Switch to
the "download image" page. 2. Check the partition to be burned, and
select multiple. 3. Make sure the path of the image file is correct.
If necessary, click the blank table cell on the right side of the path
to select it again. 4. Click "Run" button to start the upgrade, and
the device will restart automatically after the upgrade.


Flash on linux

There is no need to install device driver under Linux. Please refer to
the Windows section to connect the device.

Tool : upgrade_tool_xxx (version number)

<font color=#ff0000 >Note :</font>

 Different firmware may use different versions of tools, please
download the corresponding version according to the

upgrade instructions

.

Upgrade_tool

Download

Linux_Upgrade_Tool

 (

Android8.1 need Linux_Upgrade_Tool_for_android8.1

), and install it to host filesystem: Download

Linux_Upgrade_Tool

, And install it into the system as follows for easy invocation:

   unzip Linux_Upgrade_Tool_xxxx.zip
   cd Linux_UpgradeTool_xxxx
   sudo mv upgrade_tool /usr/local/bin
   sudo chown root:root /usr/local/bin/upgrade_tool
   sudo chmod a+x /usr/local/bin/upgrade_tool

Upgrade unified firmware - update.img：

   sudo upgrade_tool uf update.img

If the upgrade fails, try erasing before upgrading. Be sure to erase
and upgrade against the table (upgrade_table.md) in

upgrade instructions

.

   # erase flash : Using the ef parameter requires the loader file or the corresponding update.img to be specified.
   # update.img :The ubuntu firmware you need to upgrade.
   sudo upgrade_tool ef update.img
   # upgrade again
   sudo upgrade_tool uf update.img

Upgrade Partition image

Android7.1, Android8.1 use the following methods:

   sudo upgrade_tool di -b /path/to/boot.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -k /path/to/kernel.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -s /path/to/system.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -r /path/to/recovery.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -m /path/to/misc.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -re /path/to/resource.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -p paramater   # upgrade parameter
   sudo upgrade_tool ul bootloader.bin # upgrade bootloader

Android9.0、Android10.0 use the following way:

   sudo upgrade_tool di -b boot.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -dtbo dtbo.img  
   sudo upgrade_tool di -misc misc.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -parameter parameter.txt
   sudo upgrade_tool di -r recovery.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -super super.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -trust trust.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -uboot uboot.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -vbmeta vbmeta.img

Ubuntu (GPT) uses the following methods:

   sudo upgrade_tool ul $LOADER
   sudo upgrade_tool di -p $PARAMETER
   sudo upgrade_tool di -uboot $UBOOT
   sudo upgrade_tool di -trust $TRUST
   sudo upgrade_tool di -boot $BOOT
   sudo upgrade_tool di -recovery $RECOVERY
   sudo upgrade_tool di -misc $MISC
   sudo upgrade_tool di -oem $OEM
   sudo upgrade_tool di -userdata $USERDATA
   sudo upgrade_tool di -rootfs $ROOTFS

If the upgrade fails due to flash problems, you can try low-level
formatting and erase nand flash:

   sudo upgrade_tool lf update.img	# low-level formatting
   sudo upgrade_tool ef update.img	# erase

FAQs

1. How to forcibly enter MaskRom mode

A1 :

 If the board does not enter Loader mode, you can try to force your
way into MaskRom mode. See operation method

"How to enter MaskRom mode"

.

2. Analysis of programming failure

If Download Boot Fail occurs during the programming process, or an
error occurs during the programming process, as shown in the figure
below, it is usually caused by the poor connection of the USB cable,
the inferior cable, or the insufficient drive capability of the USB
port of the computer. Troubleshoot the computer USB port.

