Export device system

This chapter applies to: When the user has completed the deployment of
the work environment on one device, the current environment needs to
be completely exported for batch deployment to other devices on the
same platform.Users can also backup the current development
environment by exporting the device file system.

The export device system is divided into two steps

Export device rootfs

Re-package the complete firmware, re-package rootfs and other firmware
components on the PC, and generate complete firmware

Export device rootfs

Install fireflydev on the device

   sudo apt update
   sudo apt install fireflydev

Use ff_export_rootfs to export the root file system

It is recommended to use a mobile hard disk with a larger capacity

The export tool will perform operations such as apt clean to reduce
the file system size

Export the root file system to the /media/firefly/AC91-C4AE/
directory, the actual example is as follows:  root@firefly:~#
ff_export_rootfs         ff_export_rootfs </path/to/store> [-t
<ext4|btrfs>]  ff_export_rootfs /media/firefly/AC91-C4AE/

Compresses the root file system and removes unnecessary empty space to
reduce memory usage      #Some customers say that the exported rootfs
size is 3.3G, but only 3G is actually used, because the rootfs is not
compressed     e2fsck -p -f Firefly_Ubuntu_18.04.6_rootfs.img
resize2fs  -M Firefly_Ubuntu_18.04.6_rootfs.img

Second package complete firmware

Tool download: firefly-linux-repack

This tool is suitable for users who need to replace any part of the
firmware349

Install the necessary environment on the PC: sudo apt-get install
lib32stdc++6

   firefly-linux-repack
       ├── bin
       │ ├── afptool
       │ └── rkImageMaker
       ├── pack.sh
       ├── Readme_en.md
       ├── Readme.md
       └── unpack.sh

Unpack Copy the officially released firmware to the current directory,
rename it to update.img, execute unpack.sh After unpacking is
complete, the generated file is in the output directory.

Combined package Keep the current directory structure, file name, etc.
unchanged, replace the file with the same name under output/ with the
customer's own file Execute pack.sh, after execution, generate
new_update.img, which is the packaged firmware The rootfs file name
must be rootfs.img The file name of parameter.txt must be
parameter.txt

Note: During the package process, if the rootfs partition is not the
last partition, the program will follow the size of the rootfs file,
Automatically modify the size of the rootfs partition in
parameter.txt. If the user himself changes parameter.txt, please pay
attention to the entire package process.

   tar -xzf firefly-linux-repack.tgz
   cd firefly-linux-repack
   mv /xxx/FIREFLY-RK3399-UBUNTU18.04-GPT-20200714-1510.img update.img
   ./unpack.sh

   cp /customer/rootfs.img output/Image/rootfs.img

   ./pack.sh
   ls new_update.img
