FAQS

RK3399 HDMI 4K Resolution

RK3399 firmware default support HDMI 4K resolution output,
corresponding UI is 2K resolution stretch to 4K mode, However, some
users need point-to-point 4K UI. 4K UI issue as follows:

1.Is it necessary to use 4K UI?

If you just want 4K video or 4K images, there is no need to configure
4K UI, as the system's default video player and image browser can
support.

2.How to configure 4K UI?

Configure the FrameBuffer to 4K, and then make sure the HDMI
resolution is set to 4K, as follows:

android7.1/android8.1

   persist.sys.framebuffer.main=3840x2160@60 

android9.0 and after

   persist.vendor.framebuffer.main=3840x2160@60 

3.Flicker appears after configuring the 4K UI

For details, see the

[documentation]

Open Root permissions

There are many powerful functions of the Android system that require
root permissions. Developers often encounter permissions problems when
using them. How to enable the root permissions of the system on the
Firefly platform? Firefly has added the function of starting root
privileges in the system. The specific steps are as follows:

Find About device in Settgins apk and click into it;

After clicking on Build number 5 times, it will prompt (you are now a
developer);

Then return to the previous level and click the option Developer
options, and click ROOT access in the options to open the root
authority function.


What should I do if the boot is abnormal and restarts cyclically?

It may be that the power supply current is not enough. Please use a
power supply with a voltage of 12V and a current of 2.5A~3A.

What is the default username and password for Ubuntu?

Username: firefly

Password: firefly

Switch super user sudo -s

How to support RK3399K chip?

The highest frequency of the RK3399K chip can reach 2.016GHz. If the
hardware device in your hand uses the RK3399K chip and needs to
support RK3399K, manually add the following patch. Take the RK3399K
chip supported on the AIO-3399J all-in-one machine as an example:

   #Before patching, first confirm whether there is a kernel/arch/arm64/boot/dts/rockchip/rk3399k-opp.dtsi file in the SDK source code
   #After confirming that the file exists, manually add the following patch to the final dts, as follows, manually add the following in rk3399-firefly-aio.dts:

   git diff
   diff --git a/kernel/arch/arm64/boot/dts/rockchip/rk3399-firefly-aio.dts b/kernel/arch/arm64/boot/dts/rockchip/rk3399-firefly-aio.dts
   index 060e88d..14f9fb3 100644
   --- a/kernel/arch/arm64/boot/dts/rockchip/rk3399-firefly-aio.dts
   +++ b/kernel/arch/arm64/boot/dts/rockchip/rk3399-firefly-aio.dts
   @@ -43,6 +43,7 @@
    /dts-v1/;

    #include "rk3399-firefly-aio.dtsi"
   +#include "rk3399k-opp.dtsi"

    / {
           model = "AIO-3399J HDMI (Android)";

Check the main frequency list after recompiling and burning the
firmware:

   #Small core highest frequency 1.512GHz
   cat /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policy0/scaling_available_frequencies
   408000 600000 816000 1008000 1200000 1416000 1512000

   # Large core maximum frequency 2.016GHz
   cat /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policy4/scaling_available_frequencies
   408000 600000 816000 1008000 1200000 1416000 1608000 1800000 2016000

Git link address?

https://gitlab.com/TeeFirefly/FireNow-Nougat

Where is the RK3399 chip technical manual?

RK3399 chip technical manual link:

Brief

 [Part1](http://www. t-firefly.com/download/Firefly-
RK3399/docs/TRM/Rockchip%20RK3399TRM%20V1.3%20Part1.pdf)
[Part2](http://www.t-firefly.com/download/Firefly-RK3399/
docs/TRM/Rockchip%20RK3399TRM%20V1.3%20Part2.pdf)

Write number tool to write SN, MAC address

Note:

 If the eMMC erase operation is performed on the development board,
the previously written data will also be cleared.

Windows way

Install RKDevInfoWriteTool  Download link

Select "RPMB" in Settings of RKDevInfoWriteTool

Configure "SN", "WIFI MAC", "LAN MAC", "BT MAC", etc. in the Settings
of RKDevInfoWriteTool as needed

The development board enters loader mode

RKDevInfoWriteTool performs write or read operations

For specific operations, please refer to the PDF document
"RKDevInfoWriteTool User Guide" under the RKDevInfoWriteTool
installation directory.

Linux way

How to write the number of the development board itself

Buildroot enable BR2_PACKAGE_VENDOR_STORAGE

Read and write operations through the vendor_storage command  Download
link  SN  vendor_storage -w VENDOR_SN_ID -t string -i cad895bedb8ee15f
vendor_storage -r VENDOR_SN_ID -t hex -i /dev/null  LAN MAC
vendor_storage -w VENDOR_LAN_MAC_ID -t string -i AABBCCDDEEFF
vendor_storage -r VENDOR_LAN_MAC_ID -t hex -i /dev/null    Others can
be operated according to the prompt of `vendor_storage -h`.

For how to read the application, please refer to the
"vendor_storage_read" function in
"buildroot/package/rockchip/vendor_storage/vendor_storage.c".

On Ubuntu system, if there is no sound after plugging in headphones,
what should I do?

"Menu" -> "Multimedia" -> "PulseAudio Volume Control" ->
"Configuration" -> Select the sound card that is working and turn off
the other sound card.

How to make the system crawl LOG under Android?

"Settings (settings)" -> "About phone (about phone)" -> Click 5 times
"Build number (version number)" -> "Developer options (Developer
options)" -> "Enable logging to save Save)". After the function is
turned on, the folder ".LOGSAVE" will be generated under the root
directory of the system "storage", which includes the system logcat
and kernel kmsg.
