Upgrading firmware on Linux

Preface

This article describes how to burn the firmware file on the host
computer to the flash memory of the ROC-RK3399-PC Pro development
board through Type-C data cable. When upgrading, you need to choose an
appropriate upgrade method according to the host operating system and
firmware type.

Ready to work

ROC-RK3399-PC Pro board

firmware

host

Good Type-C data cable data cable

Firmware file

There are two types of firmware files:

A single unified firmware  The unified firmware is a single file
packaged and merged by all files such as the partition table,
bootloader, uboot, kernel, system and so on. The firmware officially
released by Firefly adopts a unified firmware format. Upgrading the
unified firmware will update the data and partition table of all
partitions on the motherboard, and erase all data on the motherboard.

Multiple partition images  That is, files with independent functions,
such as partition table, bootloader, and kernel, are generated during
the development phase. The independent partition image can only update
the specified partition, while keeping other partition data from being
destroyed, it will be very convenient to debug during the development
process.

   Through the unified firmware unpacking / packing tool, the unified
   firmware can be unpacked into multiple partition images, or
   multiple partition images can be merged into a unified firmware.

Flash on linux

There is no need to install device driver under Linux. Please refer to
the Windows section to connect the device.

工具:Linux_Upgrade_Tool

<font color=#ff0000 >Note :</font>

 Different firmware may use different versions of tools, please
download the corresponding version according to the

upgrade instructions

.

upgrade_tool

Upgrade_tool

Download

Linux_Upgrade_Tool

 (

Android8.1 need Linux_Upgrade_Tool_for_android8.1

), and install it to host filesystem: Download

Linux_Upgrade_Tool

, And install it into the system as follows for easy invocation:

   unzip Linux_Upgrade_Tool_xxxx.zip
   cd Linux_UpgradeTool_xxxx
   sudo mv upgrade_tool /usr/local/bin
   sudo chown root:root /usr/local/bin/upgrade_tool
   sudo chmod a+x /usr/local/bin/upgrade_tool

Upgrade unified firmware - update.img：

   sudo upgrade_tool uf update.img

If the upgrade fails, try erasing before upgrading. Be sure to erase
and upgrade against the table (upgrade_table.md) in

upgrade instructions

.

   # erase flash : Using the ef parameter requires the loader file or the corresponding update.img to be specified.
   # update.img :The ubuntu firmware you need to upgrade.
   sudo upgrade_tool ef update.img
   # upgrade again
   sudo upgrade_tool uf update.img

Upgrade Partition image

Android7.1, Android8.1 use the following methods:

   sudo upgrade_tool di -b boot.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -k kernel.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -s system.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -r recovery.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -m misc.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -re resource.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -p paramater
   sudo upgrade_tool ul bootloader.bin

Android9.0、Android10.0 use the following way:

   sudo upgrade_tool di -b boot.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -dtbo dtbo.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -misc misc.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -parameter parameter.txt
   sudo upgrade_tool di -r recovery.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -super super.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -trust trust.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -uboot uboot.img
   sudo upgrade_tool di -vbmeta vbmeta.img

Ubuntu (GPT) uses the following methods:

   sudo upgrade_tool ul $LOADER
   sudo upgrade_tool di -p $PARAMETER
   sudo upgrade_tool di -uboot $UBOOT
   sudo upgrade_tool di -trust $TRUST
   sudo upgrade_tool di -boot $BOOT
   sudo upgrade_tool di -recovery $RECOVERY
   sudo upgrade_tool di -misc $MISC
   sudo upgrade_tool di -oem $OEM
   sudo upgrade_tool di -userdata $USERDATA
   sudo upgrade_tool di -rootfs $ROOTFS

If the upgrade fails due to flash problems, you can try low-level
formatting and erase nand flash:

   sudo upgrade_tool lf update.img	# low-level formatting
   sudo upgrade_tool ef update.img	# erase

FAQs

1. How to forcibly enter MaskRom mode

A1 :

 If the board does not enter Loader mode, you can try to force your
way into MaskRom mode. See operation method

"How to enter MaskRom mode"

.

2. Analysis of programming failure

If Download Boot Fail occurs during the programming process, or an
error occurs during the programming process, as shown in the figure
below, it is usually caused by the poor connection of the USB cable,
the inferior cable, or the insufficient drive capability of the USB
port of the computer. Troubleshoot the computer USB port.

