More technical cases show

SIP service construction

SIP (Session Initiation Protocol) was developed to help provide
advanced telephone services across the Internet. Internet telephony
(IP telephony) is evolving to a formal business telephony model, and
SIP is an important member of the NGN (Next Generation Network) series
of protocols required to ensure the realization of this evolution.
Support H.264 protocol.

"OpenSIP Build)"

Export device system

When the user has completed the deployment of the work environment on
one device, the current environment needs to be completely exported
for batch deployment to other devices on the same platform.Users can
also backup the current development environment by exporting the
device file system.

"Export device system"

OpenCV read mipi camera

Many customers encounter problems with OpenCV, and they mostly focus
on how to obtain the data of the mipi camera. Because the V4l2
protocol used by OpenCV is different from the mipi camera driver
protocol written by Rockchip, the camera API of OpenCV cannot be used
directly. This section describes how to compile Opencv and add
GStreamer API support.

"Opencv compilation and installation"

rknn_toolkit_lite

RKNN Toolkit Lite is a stripped-down version of RKNN Toolkit that
provides users with a development kit for model inference on PC,
RK3399Pro, RK1808, RK1806, V1109, RV1126. Users can easily and quickly
complete the development and deployment of AI applications through the
Python interface provided by the SDK. Compared with the complicated
and time-consuming installation process of RKNN Toolkit, the
installation process of RKNN Toolkit Lite takes less than ten
minutes.Please read the "3399pro NPU Development Manual" carefully for
installation.

"3399pro NPU Development Manual"
